# CourseGrader
This project is a gradebook calculator built in python. This project takes in a .txt file in the form of a list of names and grades. An example of the format needed is provided in the form of the grades.txt file. This file begins with a single integer that tells the program how many students, and by extension their grades, are collected in the file. Each student’s record begins with their first and last name. The program will only collect a first and last name. Each name is then followed by a list of grades. This program can handle an indeterminate number of grades for each student. Each grade is listed as a value out of 100 and is given equal weight compared to the other grades. There is a 0 at the end of every list of grades. This denotes the end of each student's record. With that background information in hand, it will be easier to understand the main CourseGrader.py program.
		
This program starts by defining a class to help organize the data collected form the input file. The class student has the constructor that takes three arguments. It takes in two strings and a list. The list must be sorted in ascending order prior to being passed into the constructor. These are used for the instance variables for the class. The gradeSort() method is a method to compose all grades into a string. It takes the already sorted list and composes it into a string with commas separating each grade before returning it to the caller. The get_average() method simply finds the average of the list of grades by taking the sum of all the values in the list and dividing it by the length of the list. It then returns that value to the caller. The get_letter() method first calls the get_average () function and stores it in the userGrade variable to be able to provide a letter grade in addition to a list of grades later. It provides this letter grade by comparing the average in a number of if and elif statements each of which returns the proper letter grade value. The final method of the class is the method for printing the string. It returns the first name and last name of the student gotten from the constructor as well as the grade list and grade letter provided by the earlier methods. 
		
The main body of the program starts by opening the aforementioned grades.txt file in read mode. The program then uses the readlines() method of the input file to get each line of the grades.txt file as a list. This info is stored into a new list called input. Input is then iterated over by a for loop that removes any leading and trailing spaces to ensure that the names and integers will be both clean and castable to the proper type later. Next, the program then takes the first value from the input list which is the number of total students and saves it into a variable for later use. That value is then removed from the list to prevent it from complicating later loops. The next for loop iterates over the entire remainder of the input list and tries to cast each value as an int. If it cannot cast it as an int, it will cast it as a string. This will be used in later loops to decide when each student’s record is over and which values are names which will be placed in a separate list.
		
The program then creates three empty lists. The studentInfo list will be used to hold each individual student’s grades before moving them to another list. The AllStudentsInfo list is that list. Once the studentInfo list is filled with one student’s complete grade list, it will be appended to AllStudentsInfo. The third list, AllGrades, will be filled with what the name suggests: the grades of all the students. That will be used for generating some parts of the summary file which will be touched on later. 
		
The following for loop iterates over the input list and will be what collects the grades of each student and places each list of grades inside AllStudentsInfo as explained above. It does so within the first if statement. That statement checks if that value of the input list is both not a 0, which denotes the end of the list of grades, and an integer, which each grade was cast into earlier. If a value passes that logic gate, it is then added to the studentInfo list. Once the for loop finds a 0 in the input list, that means that the list of grades has ended and it can add studentInfo to AllStudentsInfo. It then clears studentInfo so that it can hold the next student’s grades. The next for loop sorts each list nested inside of AllStudentsInfo so that it is passed into the student class already sorted as described earlier.
		
The program then empties AllGrades and creates AllNames to aid in both printing values to the console as well as creating an output file later. The for loop that follows both declarations checks each value of input to see if it is a string or int. If it is a string, then it is placed into the AllNames list. If the value is a int and isn’t a 0, that means it is a grade and is put into AllGrades. The program then creates two new lists to separate each name into a first and last name. It does this by iterating over the AllNames list and using the split() method to separate the first and the last name and they are stored into the appropriate list.
		
The final portions of the program are outputting to console each student’s info through the student class. It then starts to get other noteworthy information from the lists. The first information it gets are the highest and lowest grades overall. These are then stored into an appropriate variable. It then finds the average grade for all the students. The next for loop is used to find the student with the longest name. It iterates over the list of the names and compares the length of the current name with the longest name encountered so far. It starts with the first name as the longest and will only update that value when it encounters a name with a greater length. It then stores this name in an appropriate variable.
		
To output this more specialized data, the program opens a text file named summary.txt. It then writes all the data that wasn’t output to console through the student class to this file. The summary.txt to match the grades.txt file is provided here.
